#Readme file

This repository holds the results associated with the journal article Risk of bias in machine learning and statistical models to predict height or weight: a systematic
review in fetal and paediatric medicine.

Preprint of this paper can be accessed: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4788669

Authors: Neil R Lawrence, Irina Bacila, Joseph Tonge, Anthea Tucker, Jeremy Dawson, Zi-Qiang Lang, Nils
P Krone, Paula Dhiman, Gary S Collins

Background
Prediction of suboptimal growth allows early intervention that can improve outcomes for developing fetus’ as well
as infants and children. We assessed the risk of bias of published prediction models that predict height and weight in
fetal and paediatric medicine to understand their quality.
Method
We systematically searched MEDLINE and EMBASE for peer reviewed original research studies published in 2022. We
included studies if they developed or validated a multivariable model to predict height or weight of an individual,
and excluded genetic studies. Risk of bias was assessed for all prediction models and analyses using the Prediction
model Risk Of Bias ASsessment Tool (PROBAST).
Results
Sixty-four studies were included, in which we assessed the development of 180 models and validation of 61 models.
Models performed best in the outcomes domain, with 61% of models developed and 85% of models rated at low risk
of bias. However, 100% of the models were rated as high risk of bias in the analysis domain, resulting in an overall
high risk of bias in all 241 models assessed. Only 29% (53/180) of the developed models were reported in their
respective studies hindering further research and external validation.
Conclusion
Recent models developed and validated in 2022 to predict height and weight in fetuses and children are at high risk
of bias and are unsuitable for application in clinical practice. Research into prediction of growth should focus on
model updating using appropriate data sources with transparent reporting to allow for external validation.

